Search syntax documentation (#432)
G-Research/fasttrackml: docs/search_syntax.md

# Search Syntax Documentation

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: what do you think about to have a `glossary` with links so you can easily jump to any section? not a requirement but just a thought if I want to quickly check special section.

Author: Yes! I'll add it

This document provides an overview of the search syntax that users can utilize to filter metrics and runs.

## Search Runs
You can filter the runs using the following run attributes:
| Property    | Description | Type |
| -------- | ------- | ------- |
| ```name```  | Run name | ```string```|
| ```hash``` | Run hash | ```string```|
| ```experiment``` | Experiment name | ```string```|
| ```tags``` | List of run tags |```dictionary```|
| ```archived``` | True if run is archived, otherwise False | ```boolean```|
| ```active``` | True if run is active(in progress), otherwise False | ```boolean``` |
| ```duration``` | Run duration in seconds | ```numeric```|
| ```created_at``` | Run creation datetime | ```numeric``` |
| ```finalized_at``` | Run end datetime | ```numeric``` |

> | ```metrics``` | Set of run metrics | ```dictionary``` |

Reviewer 2: can these be given table-like format in the markdown source, too? ie, lining up the columns

```

Select only the runs where the name starts with "Test"
```python
run.name.startswith('Test')
```

Select only the runs where the name ends with "Run1"
```python
run.name.endswith('Run1')
```

#### Example with ```run.duration``` (numeric)

Select only the runs where the duration is exactly 111111111

```python
run.duration == 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is not 111111111
```python
run.duration != 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is greater than 111111111
```python
run.duration > 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is greater or equal to 111111111
```python
run.duration >= 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is less than 111111111
```python
run.duration < 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is less or equal to 111111111
```python
run.duration <= 111111111
```

#### Example with ```run.archived``` (boolean)
Select only the runs where the archived attribute is true
```python
run.archived == True
```

Select only the runs where the archived attribute is not true
```python
run.archived != True
```

### Run parameters
Run parameters could be accessed via attributes.
```python

> run.hparams.param1 >= 64

Reviewer: typo? `hparams`? should be just `params`.

Author: Actually should be just param1 I'll fix that

```

Select only the metrics where "Run1" is contained in the run name
```python
"Metric1" in metric.name
```

Select only the metrics where the name starts with "Test"
```python
metric.name.startswith('Test')
```

Select only the metrics where the name ends with "Metric1"
```python
metric.name.endswith('Metric1')
```

#### Example with ```metric.last``` (numeric)

Select only the metrics where the last value is exactly 1.1

```python
metric.last == 1.1
```

Select only the metrics where the last value is not 1.1
```python
metric.last != 1.1
```

Select only the metrics where the last value is greater than 1.1
```python
metric.last > 1.1
```

Select only the metrics where the duration is greater or equal to 1.1
```python
metric.last >= 1.1
```

Select only the metrics where the last value is less than 1.1
```python
metric.last < 1.1
```

Select only the metrics where the last value is less or equal to 1.1
```python
metric.last <= 1.1
```

### Filter Metrics by run
You can also filter the metrics by combining  metric attributes with run attributes.

Showing the metrics with the last value greater than 6 belonging to a run with the name that starts with marvelous.

> ![FastTrackML Metric List filter by metric and run attributes](images/metrics_filter_by_run.png)

Reviewer: what do you think to a like a complex query with different operators and cases?

Author: Yep

# Search Syntax Documentation
## Introduction

This document provides an overview of the search syntax that users can utilize to filter metrics and runs.

> 

Reviewer 3: We should start by introducing that the syntax is essentially Python "so it should feel pretty intuitive for most users", and then explain that we'll dive into more details about supported operations below.

- [Search Runs](#search-runs)
- [Search Metrics](#search-metrics)
- [Operations](#operations)
  - [String operations](#string-operations)
  - [Numeric operations](#numeric-operations)
  - [Boolean operations](#boolean-operations)
  - [Logical operations](#logical-operations)
- [Search run examples](#search-run-examples)
  - [Example with run.name (string)](#example-with-runname-string)
  - [Example with run.duration (numeric)](#example-with-runduration-numeric)
  - [Example with run.archived (boolean)](#example-with-runarchived-boolean)
  - [Run parameters](#run-parameters)
  - [Filtering Runs with Unset Attributes](#filtering-runs-with-unset-attributes)
  - [Filter Runs using Regular Expressions](#filter-runs-using-regular-expressions)
  - [Complex query for run search](#complex-query-for-run-search)
- [Search metrics examples](#search-metrics-examples)
  - [Example with metric.name (string)](#example-with-metricname-string)
  - [Example with metric.last (numeric)](#example-with-metriclast-numeric)
  - [Filter Metrics by run](#filter-metrics-by-run)
  - [Complex query for metric search](#complex-query-for-metric-search)

## Search Runs

> You can filter the runs using the following run attributes:

Reviewer 3: We should make it clear that these are attributes for the `run` object

| Property           | Description                                         | Type             |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| ```name```         | Run name                                            | ```string```     |
| ```hash```         | Run hash                                            | ```string```     |
| ```experiment```   | Experiment name                                     | ```string```     |
| ```tags```         | List of run tags                                    | ```dictionary``` |
| ```archived```     | True if run is archived, otherwise False            | ```boolean```    |
| ```active```       | True if run is active(in progress), otherwise False | ```boolean```    |
| ```duration```     | Run duration in seconds                             | ```numeric```    |
| ```created_at```   | Run creation datetime                               | ```numeric```    |
| ```finalized_at``` | Run end datetime                                    | ```numeric```    |
| ```metrics```      | Set of run metrics                                  | ```dictionary``` |

## Search Metrics

> You can filter the metrics using the following metric attributes:

Reviewer 3: We should make it clear that these are attributes for the `metric` object

| Property         | Type          |
| ---------------- | ------------- |
| ```name```       | ```string```  |
| ```last```       | ```numeric``` |
| ```last_step```  | ```numeric``` |
| ```first_step``` | ```numeric``` |

## Operations

### String operations

> For the ```string``` attributes you can use the following comparing operator:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the ```string``` attributes you can use the following comparison operator:
```

(there are multiples places where this comment applies)

- ``` == ```
- ``` != ```
- ``` in ```
- ``` .startswith() ```
- ``` .endswith() ```

### Numeric operations
For the ```numeric``` attributes you can use the following comparing operator:
- ``` == ```
- ``` != ```
- ``` > ```
- ``` >= ```
- ``` < ```
- ``` <= ```

### Boolean operations

> For the ```boolean``` attributes you can use the following comparing operator:

Reviewer 3: Please also document that having no operator or a unary operation also works for booleans, e.g. `run.archived` is the same as `run.archived == True`, and `!run.archived` is the same as `run.archived == False`

- ``` == ```
- ``` != ```

### Logical operations
You can create complex search queries combining multiple conditions with logical operators.
- ``` and ```
- ``` or ```
- ``` not ```

## Search run examples

### Example with ```run.name``` (string)
Select only the runs where the name exactly matches "TestRun1"

```python
run.name == "TestRun1"
```

Select only the runs where the name is different from "TestRun1"
```python
run.name != "TestRun1"
```

Select only the runs where "Run1" is contained in the run name
```python
"Run1" in run.name
```

Select only the runs where the name starts with "Test"
```python
run.name.startswith('Test')
```

Select only the runs where the name ends with "Run1"
```python
run.name.endswith('Run1')
```

### Example with ```run.duration``` (numeric)

> Select only the runs where the duration is exactly 111111111

Reviewer 3: Use something more realistic, like 60

```python
run.duration == 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is not 111111111
```python
run.duration != 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is greater than 111111111
```python
run.duration > 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is greater or equal to 111111111
```python
run.duration >= 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is less than 111111111
```python
run.duration < 111111111
```

Select only the runs where the duration is less or equal to 111111111
```python
run.duration <= 111111111
```

### Example with ```run.archived``` (boolean)
Select only the runs where the archived attribute is true
```python
run.archived == True
```

Select only the runs where the archived attribute is not true
```python
run.archived != True
```

### Run parameters

> Run parameters could be accessed via attributes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run parameters can be accessed via attributes.
```

![FastTrackML Run List, param filter](images/search_runs_param_filter.png)

> ### Filtering Runs with Unset Attributes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Filtering Runs with Unset Parameters
```

(there are multiples places where this comment applies)

To filter runs based on whether an attribute is not set, you can use the following syntax:

```python
run.attribute is None
```
This expression will return runs for which the specified attribute is not defined.

Showing all the runs
![FastTrackML Run List](images/search_runs.png)

Showing only the runs where param1 is not set
![FastTrackML Run List of not set param](images/search_runs_none_param.png)

### Filter Runs using Regular Expressions

> - ``` .match() ```
> - ``` .search() ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``` re.match() ```
- ``` re.search() ```
```

Match finds an exact match at the beginning of a string.
![FastTrackML Run filter using regular expression match](images/search_runs_regular_expression_match.png)

Search looks for a pattern anywhere in the string.
![FastTrackML Run filter using regular expression match](images/search_runs_regular_expression_search.png)

### Complex query for run search
The query selects the runs that meet the following conditions:

- run.archived can be either True or False.
- The duration of run must be greater than 0.

> - The run has to contain a metric named 'TestMetric' and is value of last  must be greater than 2.5.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The run has to contain a metric named 'TestMetric' and its last recorded value must be greater than 2.5.
```
